docs(span-links): Add develop docs for span links (#12829)
getsentry/sentry-docs: develop-docs/sdk/telemetry/traces/span-links.mdx

---
title: Span Links
---

> Span links associate one span with one or more spans. The most important application of linking traces are frontend applications. It's also useful in settings with producer/consumer patterns.

Reviewer: l: slight wording correction and added one more example

```suggestion
Span links associate one span with one or more spans. The most important application of linking traces are frontend applications. They're also useful in settings with producer/consumer patterns or batch operations.
```

> Span links associate one span with one or more spans. The most important application of linking traces are frontend applications. It's also useful in settings with producer/consumer patterns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Span links associate one span with one or more other spans. This is mostly useful in frontend applications; it can also be useful in settings with producer/consumer patterns.
```

> We are able to display a user journey in our tracing views to make debugging of issues easier as developers get more context on what happened before a specific issue.

Reviewer: l: 

```suggestion
By using span links, we are able to display a user journey in our tracing views to make debugging of issues easier as developers get more context on what happened before a specific issue.
```

> Without somehow linking spans together, we are limited to the duration of one trace (id), which is handled differently and kept alive for different times across our various SDKs.

Reviewer: l: I would omit this from the intro as this already is quite specific towards previous/next trace links. I'd rather keep the intro short and more general.

```suggestion
```

SDKs should follow the OpenTelemetry spec for the Link interface as defined by the platform.
Non-OTel SDKs should orient themselves on OTel, resulting in the following interface:

```ts {tabTitle:Types}
// see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/main/api/src/trace/link.ts
// or interface of respective platform
interface Link {
  // contains the SpanContext of the span to link to
  context: SpanContext;
  // key-value pair with primitive values
  attributes?: Attributes;
}

// see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/main/api/src/trace/span_context.ts
// or interface of respective platform
interface SpanContext {
  traceId: string,
  spanId: string,
  traceFlags: number,
}

type Attributes = Record<string, AttributeValues>
type AttributeValues = string | boolean | number | Array<string> | Array<boolean> | Array<number>
```

### Required Span API

Ideally, the link is added when starting a span. An optional `links` attribute is added to the `startSpan` options.

```ts {tabTitle:Span Options}
function startSpan(options: StartSpanOptions);

interface StartSpanOptions: {
  //... other options (name, attributes, etc)
  links?: Link[];
}

> ```
> 

Reviewer: l: let's add a sentence for non-Potel/Span-centric SDKs

```suggestion
```

SDKs that don't offer span-centric APIs but e.g. transaction APIs, should ensure that their respective start APIs (e.g. `startTransaction`) also offers a possibility to add links.
```

Author: I added this in line 52 :)

Furthermore, the SDKs need to expose at least an `addLink` method on their respective Span interface. For completeness with OpenTelemetry, ideally they also expose `addLinks`:

```ts {tabTitle:Span API}
interface Span {
  // return value can differ depending on platform
  addLink(link: Link): this;
  addLinks(links: Link[]): this;
}
```

> #### Dealing with Negative Sample Rates

Reviewer: l: Did you want to write something here or was this a leftover?

```suggestion
```

Author: This is a leftover. This is covered in `Negatively Sampled Traces`

## Envelope Item Payload

Span trees are serialized to transaction event envelopes in all Sentry SDKs. Therefore, the envelope item needs to accommodate span links
in its payload. If the `links` entry is an empty array, it can be omitted from the envelope.

The serialized `links` objects should always contain:

- `span_id: string` - id of the span to link to
- `trace_id: string` - trace id of the span to link to
- `sampled: boolean` - required if sampling decision of the span to link to (corresponds to `traceFlags` in Otel span context converted to `boolean`) is available
- `attributes:` - required if attributes were added to the link

Optionally, the serialized link object can contain further fields from OTel like `traceState`, `isRemote` or `droppedAttributesCount` which will be just forwarded unless we find a use case for them.

> The OTel fields `spanId`, `traceId`, and `traceFlags` should be excluded from the links objects in the envelope to avoid duplicate data (e.g. `trace_id`).

Reviewer: l: just to make it a bit more obvious:

```suggestion
The OTel fields `spanId`, `traceId`, and `traceFlags` should be excluded from the links objects in the envelope to avoid duplicate data (e.g. `trace_id` vs. `traceId`).
```

```ts {tabTitle:Example Trace Context}
// event envelope item
{
  type: "transaction";
  transaction: string;
  contexts: {
    trace: {
      span_id: string;
      parent_span_id: string;
      trace_id: string;
      // new field for links:
      links?: Array<{
        "span_id": string,
        "trace_id": string,
        sampled?: boolean, // traceFlags from Otel converted to boolean
        attributes?: Record<string, AttributeValue>,
        // + potentially more fields 1:1 from Otel. e.g. (traceState, droppedAttributesCount, isRemote)
      }>
      // ...
    }
  }
  // ...
}
```

Links that are stored in child spans are serialized in `spans[i].links`.

```ts {tabTitle:Example Span Link Data}
// event envelope item
{
  type: "transaction";
  transaction: string;
  spans: Array<{
    span_id: string;
    parent_span_id: string;
    trace_id: string;
    // new field for links:
    links?: Array<{
      "span_id": string,
      "trace_id": string,
      sampled?: boolean,
      attributes?: Record<string, AttributeValue>,
    }>
    // ...
  }>
  // ...
}
```

## Link Types

> Links don't require a special meaning or type. When necessary, use the "sentry.link.type" attribute on the link to define the link type.

Reviewer: l: wdyt about this? Just a slight rewording to make the intention more clear of the sentry.link.type attribute:

```suggestion
Links don't require a special meaning or type but if necessary (e.g. for identifying special links in the product), set the `sentry.link.type` attribute on the link to define the link type.
```

Any string can be used, but these types have predefined meanings:

> | `sentry.link.type` | Usage                                                          | UI Implications                                                                                   |
> |--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | "previous_trace"   | Linking e.g. a navigation span to the previous page load span. | Used to query linked traces. Shows a button to go to linked previous trace in the trace explorer. |

Reviewer: l: While we don't set "next_trace" in the SDK, we will most likely set it during event ingestion/storage. So I think we can mention it here, just to have it documented and "reserved".

I don't think we _need_ to add a dedicated paragraph for the next trace btw, but if you prefer it, feel free to add one similarly to the previous_trace section.

(not sure if the GH suggestion has the right format btw)

```suggestion
| `sentry.link.type` | Usage                                                          | UI Implications                                                                                   |
|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "previous_trace"   | Linking e.g. a navigation span to the previous page load span. | Used to query linked traces. Shows a button to go to linked previous trace in the trace explorer. |
| "next_trace" | Linking e.g. a pageload span to the next navigation span. | Used to query linked traces. Shows a button to go to linked next trace in the trace explorer. |
```

Furthermore, we will not show how many traces were negatively sampled in between two trace chains; only that there was at least one trace in between (see Trace 5-8).

![](./span-links-previous-trace-negative-sample.png)

## Usage Example

Adding span links should be possible at span start time, as well as when holding a reference to the span.

In the example below, by adding span links, we can link from the last navigation trace all the way back to the initial pageload trace.
By passing the `'sentry.link.type': 'previous_trace'` attribute, we can identify the link as a previous trace link in Sentry and display the spans accordingly.

```ts {tabTitle:TypeScript}
// 1st trace starts
const pageloadSpan = startInactiveSpan(...)

// 2nd trace starts
const navigation1Span = startInactiveSpan({
  name: '/users',
  links: [{
    context: pageloadSpan.spanContext(),
    attributes: {
      'sentry.link.type': 'previous_trace'
    }
  }]
});

// 3rd trace starts
const navigation2Span = startSpan({name: '/users/:id'}, (span) => {
  span.addLink({
    context: navigation1Span.spanContext(),
    attributes: {
      'sentry.link.type': 'previous_trace'
    }
  })
})
```

> ## Ingest/Relay
> 
> Relay should forward the span links in the format that is required for further processing and storage.
> Importantly, we must not require span links to be defined. They are completely optional.
> 
> As a further requirement, Relay needs to handle passing along span links in the root span as well as in any child span (see [envelope item payload](#envelope-item-payload)).
> 
> The expected type and structure of the links array and its contents is specified in Relay. This further includes specifying the type of the sentry.link.type attribute value to be a string.

Reviewer: l: I reworded this to state what Relay currently does as opposed to what it should, as we already defined this in Relay. Since we mention that the schema is specified, I also added a link to it.

```suggestion
## Ingest/Relay

Relay forwards the span links in the format that is required for further processing and storage.
Importantly, Relay doesn't require span links to be defined. They are completely optional.
Relay handles passing span links in the root span as well as in any child span (see [envelope item payload](#envelope-item-payload)).

The expected type and structure of the links array and its contents is [specified in Relay](https://github.com/getsentry/relay/blob/master/relay-event-schema/src/protocol/span.rs#L753). 
```
